
Here is a decent overview on how I think about MRI; The foundational physics of MRI, Development of pulse sequences from these physics, the current clinical practice of MRI, and where I believe future directions should go to get the most out of this imaging modality, thinking of it in a broad scale of all other imaging methods that exist and how they play off of/ intertwine with each other.

In my PhD [dissertation](https://hdl.handle.net/11299/278782) I went over some  background on the physics of MRI. In brief, MRI is an engineered sequence which allows one to spatially localize NMR signals. This spatial localization is done by introducing spatial field gradients via the use of... MRI gradient coils... kind of redundant... Anyway, by applying these gradients during an RF pulse which generated the NMR signals, we can create a frequency selection which is much smaller than the RF wavelength. Likewise, we can then dephase these excited spins in such a way to measure the 2D image in the Fourier, or k-space, domain. This can be extended to 3D imaging where no gradient is turned on during the RF excitation which results in the spins of the entire volume being excited. After spins are excited, you can think of the MR image as already being created! However, if we measured right away after this excitation, we might not be able to get very much information out of the image. This is because there are a variety of factors influencing how the spins relax back to their steady state after excitation over time. These signal influencing factors include: T1, T2, T2*, diffusion, perfusion, flow, T1/2 $\rho$ , NMR nucleolus density (PD), chemical composition, etc. With all of these signal factors, one can "play" with the imaging parameters to wait until a time where the signal difference in two voxels is very high, thus creating a "contrast" which is information that can be used for classification of tissue into different states, cancer non-cancer, broken non-broken, diseased healthy, etc. Going forward I will refer to all "normal" biological tissue as healthy and any misfunctioning tissue as diseased. This will aid in generalizing to different manifestations of unhealthy tissue that is not just cancer non-cancer. Since these healthy vs diseased tissues can manifest with different signal dependent factors, we need to way to create different contrasts for the different healthy-diseased scenarios. For example, in a specific cancer non-cancer state, the largest difference in relaxation rates might be in T2, therefore T2 weighted scans would produce the highest amount of information. In a different cancer non-cancer scenario, T1 might be different while T2s can vary wildly between the healthy and diseased state. In this case, a T2 weighted image would provide little information while a T1 weighted scan would allow you to properly distinguish between the two state, and therefor provide high information in the proper sense of [information/Shannon entropy.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy_(information_theory)) This was a simple binary thought experiment and in practice, one oftentimes needs to go down a decision tree to make classification between healthy, disease_1, disease_2,... disease_n. This is where the problem starts to explode in complexity as more scans can often lead to better information, but this gain in information can be marginal, especially when it is curtailed to a single diagnostic method, such as MRI, when there are other diagnostic tools out there like biopsy, CT, blood content analysis, blood genetic analysis, etc. The interplay between information gained, i.e. the sensitivity and specificity of a diagnosis given the entire history of measurements taken on a patient, the cost of improving diagnostic accuracy with additional measurements, and the potential benefit to the patient after given a correct diagnosis is a extremely complex dance that balances the individuals and societies preferences along with some judgement and approximations of different actions at different times. For example, getting more imaging to ensure the exact variety of cancer and localizing the cancer to every location in the body would technically be an improvement in "diagnostic accuracy". However, it is very likely that the patient would have a better quality of life 5 years down the road if a decisive therapeutic action was taken to remove the cancer in the body now as opposed to another 6 months of imaging. In this scenario, additional imaging not only comes with an increased cost, it comes with an objectively worse final outcome. Since this complex interplay of disease diagnosis to starting disease therapy has an extremely complex web of interactions that I do not want to go over in this MRI topics section, we will leave it for another day and return to the topic of MRI with this surface level background knowledge. 

In the time-cost-accuracy away framing from above, MRI typically sits in an intermediate state. The patients have has some prior testing done to determine that the information provided by MR imaging would improve diagnosis ==***at a reasonable cost.***== This is where the MRI researchers some into play to engineer the best solutions they can to get to this improved diagnosis. One of the first hurdles that needs to be engineered around is cost. If this system costs a million dollars per scan, the ultimate utility of the diagnostic method is marginal at best. Therefore, we must strive to lower cost which aid with accessibility and total utility. However, this cost should not be naively thought of as simply the cost of the MRI scan, but also the cost of extracting information from an MRI scan, which is typically done by a radiologist who demands a high salary. Here we see that even if engineers make MRIs accessible for increased scan volumes, a new bottleneck appears in regards to Radiologist compression/information extraction from the imaging, a seemingly much more troublesome problem to solve within the current paradigm of human image reviews. A potential solution to this bottleneck would be the creation of machine interpreted scans via cleaver algorithms (while I hate to use the term, it may help the reader, this idea is an "AI" image reviewer. I dislike the use of the term since it is not a true intelligence, just a model that predicts diseases based on measurements.). Here we have stumbled upon two promising areas of research, computer based image diagnosis and cost-competitive MRI. Unsurprisingly these are very active and popular areas of research in 2026 with many groups starting to research ultra-low field MRI/ portable MRI and of course the crazy boom in "AI"... On the other hand, there may be some applications where the fundamental physical limits of lower field scanning, i.e. low SNR, cannot provide the information required to improve diagnosis of certain disease states (or provides similar diagnostic information at a significantly increased cost compared to other methods that exist in the world that are not MRI). In such instances, "improvements" in MRI performance need to be made in order for the method to provide value to patients and a society. 

test change


Historically, MRI started at lower field strengths since this is what researchers were able to patch together in their labs. However, as commercial viability of the imaging modality grew in maturity, large corporations were able to invest in higher and higher field systems to improve SNR and imaging time of MRI scans. 