
Here is a decent overview on how I think about MRI; The foundational physics of MRI, Development of pulse sequences from these physics, the current clinical practice of MRI, and where I believe future directions should go to get the most out of this imaging modality, thinking of it in a broad scale of all other imaging methods that exist and how they play off of/ intertwine with each other.

In my PhD [dissertation](https://hdl.handle.net/11299/278782) I went over some  background on the physics of MRI. In brief, MRI is an engineered sequence of events which allows one to spatially localize NMR signals. This spatial localization is done by introducing spatial field gradients via the use of... MRI gradient coils... kind of redundant... Anyway, by applying these gradients during an RF pulse which generated the NMR signals, we can create a frequency selection which is much smaller than the RF wavelength. Likewise, we can then dephase these excited spins in such a way to measure the 2D image in the Fourier, or k-space, domain. This can be extended to 3D imaging where no gradient is turned on during the RF excitation which results in the spins of the entire volume being excited. After spins are excited, you can think of the MR image as already being created! However, if we measured right away after this excitation, we might not be able to get very much information out of the image. This is because there are a variety of factors influencing how the spins relax back to their steady state after excitation over time. These signal influencing factors include: T1, T2, T2*, diffusion, perfusion, flow, T1/2 $\rho$ , NMR nucleolus density (PD), chemical composition, etc. With all of these signal factors, one can "play" with the imaging parameters to wait until a time where the signal difference in two voxels is very high, thus creating a "contrast" which is information that can be used for classification of tissue into different states, cancer non-cancer, broken non-broken, diseased healthy, etc. Going forward I will refer to all "normal" biological tissue as healthy and any misfunctioning tissue as diseased. This will aid in generalizing to different manifestations of unhealthy tissue that is not just cancer non-cancer. Since these healthy vs diseased tissues can manifest with different signal dependent factors, we need to way to create different contrasts for the different healthy-diseased scenarios. For example, in a specific disease vs healthy state, the largest difference in relaxation rates might be in T2, therefore T2 weighted scans would produce the highest amount of information. In a different diseased scenario, T1 might be different while T2s can vary wildly between the healthy and diseased state. In this case, a T2 weighted image would provide little information while a T1 weighted scan would allow you to properly distinguish between the two state, and therefor provide high information in the proper sense of [information/Shannon entropy.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy_(information_theory)) This was a simple binary thought experiment and in practice, one oftentimes needs to go down a decision tree to make classification between healthy, disease_1, disease_2,... disease_n. This is where the problem starts to explode in complexity as more scans can often lead to better information, but this gain in information can be marginal, especially when it is curtailed to a single diagnostic method, such as MRI, when there are other diagnostic tools out there like biopsy, CT, blood content analysis, blood genetic analysis, etc. The interplay between information gained, i.e. the sensitivity and specificity of a diagnosis given the entire history of measurements taken on a patient, the cost of improving diagnostic accuracy with additional measurements, and the potential benefit to the patient after given a correct diagnosis is a extremely complex dance that balances the individual's and societies preferences along with some judgement and approximations of different actions at different times. For example, getting more imaging to ensure the exact variety of cancer and localizing the cancer to every location in the body would technically be an improvement in "diagnostic accuracy". However, it is very likely that the patient would have a better quality of life 5 years down the road if a decisive therapeutic action was taken to remove the cancer in the body now as opposed to another 6 months of imaging. In this scenario, additional imaging not only comes with an increased cost, it comes with an objectively worse final outcome. Since this complex interplay of disease diagnosis to starting disease therapy has an extremely complex web of interactions that I do not want to go over in this MRI topics section, we will leave it for another day
[[General Thoughts on Medical Decision Trees]] 
and return to the topic of MRI with this surface level background knowledge. 

In the time-cost-accuracy framing from above, MRI typically sits in an intermediate state. The patients have has some prior testing done to determine that the information provided by MR imaging would improve diagnosis ==***at a "reasonable" cost.***== This is where the MRI researchers some into play to engineer the best solutions they can to get to this improved diagnosis. One of the first hurdles that needs to be engineered around is that cost aspect. If this system costs a million dollars per scan, the ultimate utility of the diagnostic method is marginal at best since the vast majority of society could not afford it. Therefore, we must strive to lower cost which aids in accessibility and total utility. However, this cost should not be naively thought of as simply the cost of the MRI scan, but also the cost of extracting information from an MRI scan, which is typically done by a radiologist who demands a high salary. Here we see that even if engineers make MRIs accessible for increased scan volumes, a new bottleneck appears in regards to Radiologist compression/information extraction from the imaging, a seemingly much more troublesome problem to solve within the current paradigm of human image reviews. A potential solution to this bottleneck would be the creation of machine interpreted scans via cleaver algorithms (while I hate to use the term, it may help the reader, this idea is an "AI" image reviewer. I dislike the use of the term since it is not a true intelligence, just a model that predicts diseases based on measurements and the use of the "AI" term adds a flavor of overhyping that I do not appreciate). Here we have stumbled upon two promising areas of research, computer based image diagnosis and cost-competitive MRI. Unsurprisingly these are very active and popular areas of research in 2026 with many groups starting to research ultra-low field MRI/ portable MRI and of course the crazy boom in "AI"... On the other hand, there may be some applications where the fundamental physical limits of lower field scanning, i.e. low SNR, cannot provide the information required to improve diagnosis of certain disease states (or provides similar diagnostic information at a significantly increased cost compared to other methods that exist in the world that are not MRI). One method to increase SNR would be to simply measure your sample again, however, this exacerbates one of the ==***other main issues with MRI which is speed***==. It takes quite a long time to acquire an MRI scan, this is because every scan has to generate the MRI signals (RF excitation), then you need to wait until the optimal contrast that you're expecting occurs, say something like 80ms for T2 based scans, then measure a fraction of that image in k-space. Since you can only readout k-space data for so long until the signal is gone, you must wait for some steady state initial magnetization to occur again and run another entire excite, wait, readout cycle. For a single MRI scan, there can be hundreds of these cycles which results in long acquisition times. In contrast to other imaging modalities like ultrasound and Xray, the difference is the waiting period which is where the contrast in MR images comes from. Ultrasound generates its signal at a transducer and then only needs to wait for a reflection to come back at the speed of sound. For imaging volumes the size of the human body, this happens nearly instantaneously. Likewise for xray and CT. The signal is generated by some linear accelerator and then you detect the signal after it passes through the body at the speed of light. Again, no waiting for contrast to develop, you get instant contrast from the immediate attenuation of the xrays. There are a very wide range of methods aimed at improving speed ranging from parallel imaging, compressed sensing, EPI, turbo factors, ect. Again, not so surprisingly, these accelerated MR imaging methods are a very popular and vibrant area of research.
Now say that no mater what sequence parameters we choose, we simply cannot get the SNR required to improve diagnostic information, the other degree of freedom one has is in the magnetic field strength. By increasing the magnetic field strength we can increase SNR. This is (roughly) because the bulk magnetization increases along with the Larmor frequency, which in turn can generate a greater change in magnetic flux of a pickup coil and therefore a higher EMF. However, when these field strengths get too large, the increased Larmor frequency results in a shorter RF wavelength which can cause sever inhomogeneities at higher fields, for instance 7T. In order to properly explore the utility of these higher field scanners, new technologies and sequence modification methods need to be developed. One of these technologies needing to be developed is improved imaging coil arrays. At lower fields, one can achieve 90+% the ultimate intrinsic SNR with only a handful of decoupled receiver loops. However, at higher fields this number increases to the range of 32-128 coils. Similar problems occur on the transmit side where the standard birdcage geometries are no longer optimal and can severely limit imaging potential. Secondly, there is a new patient safety concern of local heating. Since the wavelength is now small compared to the body, local heating hotspots can occur which could theoretically cause local tissue damage. This local heating safety limit has been found to severely limit clinical imaging workflows as standard image sequences with a high number of slices and large flip angles will pass this limit. Likewise on the B1+ excitation fields side, the short in-vivo wavelength leads to spatially varying flip angles which degrades image quality. To alleviate these wavelength problems, researchers have started to explore parallel transmit (pTx) methods. In these pTx methods, the relative phase between different transmit channels are varied to "move" around these B1+ and SAR fields to smooth out the final flip angles and heating profiles. Placing this research in our broader mental framework, these UHF MRI systems are aiming to add diagnostic information that is unavailable at lower fields. Technology at these UHF systems has advanced enough to start to evaluate exactly where the increased SNR is positively correlated with increased diagnostic information. Then to make up for the cost of the system, we are looking for a non-linear increase in diagnostic information, such that a disease state could only be determined with 50% accuracy at 3T might be able to be correctly determined at 80+% by a 7T imaging session; or instead of needing to wait for a disease to spread for a year before it is detectable at 3T with 80+% confidence, one might be able to detect it at 6 months with 80+% confidence at 7T. 
This complex interplay of technology development and "clinical" applications is a fascinating problem the I believe is often overlooked and/or extremely difficult to study due to the friction of MDs and technical researcher communication. An interesting company that I believe is aiming to solve a lot of these problems (not just with MRI but really the entire multi-modal diagnosis / intervention planning medical decision tree) is Function Health. The promise of this company that is everything that I believe we should strive for in healthcare and a great and huge step in solving the healthcare epidemic in the US (and I assume other areas of the world but I'm most familiar with the US and all of the intricacies of our health care system as that is my country of residence). Empowering individuals to learn about early biomarkers and have a true personalized time series of biomarkers is a great way to prevent adverse events. Furthermore, this data collection compounds on itself, enabling more algorithmic (AI) analysis across broad populations in a compliant cohort which increases data quality and minimized extraneous bad lifestyle factor confounding variables. Furthermore, the value proposition to todays customers to Function is enormous! If they can truly track their disease state and have accurate reports on potential risks coming up from longitudinal biomarker data, they can make economic decisions to enroll in either more or less comprehensive insurance policies, thereby reducing their total cost of healthcare! I want to work for this company. It is building something that I believe in with a deep passion and that I believe I can help to build with my education, skills, experiences, and world-view. Coming from a PhD in MRI, I am used to large multi-modal datasets, from imaging sessions across patients with different contrasts, different contrast optimizations, EM field simulations and translating EM fields into a 2 or 3 step removed goal of "improved image quality" during MRI, and real-time pTx optimizations. Before my PhD, I double majored in Mathematics and physics, graduating Summa Cum Laude in physics, the only one to do so in my UMN physics class of 2020. In both of these majors, I was interested in mathematical modeling of biological networks and/or biophysics with a strong motivation in improving health. Not just healthcare, but human health in general, almost entirely different than "healthcare" since this is typically practiced as disease-care in the US. Function is a company that I see aligning nearly perfectly with these goals and I believe this deep alignment would enable me to meaningfully help advance Function in achieving its goal of empowering people to live longer HEALTHIER lives.