In general, the more experience one has in a particular area, the better performance and results one can generate in that area. This human experience is analogous to data for training machine learning/ AI models. The more high quality data that is used to train a machine learning model, typically the better performance of that model. Experience in the human sense or data in the machine learning sense can be framed in a probabilistic sense as a set of priors with the ultimate goal of imaging to improve diagnostic confidence where we are interested in the probability of **correctly** diagnosing a disease state subject to some measurements taken on the individual in question and some interpretation by some classifier. In the context of MRI, the measurements taken consists of a series of images resulting from an imaging session and the classifier is typically a trained radiologist. In this case, the radiologist has a set of priors which includes years of medical training, a mountain of previous images that they have read, and the images provided for this particular patient. The overall goal is to improve the sensitivity and specificity of the diagnosis that the radiologist prescribes. There are many different ways to do this, with one of the most popular method being improved reconstructions via the use of AI algorithms. However, this emphasis on the reconstruction side overlooks the critical step of probing the system in a way that results in differences between diseased and healthy tissues. Pixel intensity of MR images typically represent total NMR signal localized to each voxel in the image. In order to generate this NMR signal, you need to excite nuclear spins. After you excite these nuclear spins, sequence parameters at particular timings are played out before you measure the NMR signal. If these sequence parameters and timings are poorly chosen, signal from healthy and diseased tissue can be indistinguishable and therefore no AI reconstruction methods would be able to generate an image that could be used to improve the diagnostic accuracy of a radiologist. In this aim, we seek to build a set of universal prior of tissue relaxation constants for diseased and healthy tissue. Using this new set of tissue relaxation priors, we will then develop optimization method to directly utilize this set of priors to improve contrast between healthy and diseased tissue. 

Goal 1: Creation of a tissue relaxation database at 7T
We will run quantitative imaging studies on different anatomies of interest including the prostate, kidneys, liver, etc and process these quantitative measurements into a database of standard relaxation rates with expected ranges, similar to what is done for bloodwork measurements. The acquisitions used will consist of ______ ____ and will be processed using ___. Raw data along with processed data will all be uploaded as public databased to enable futher refinement of relaxation parameters and future investigations.

Goal 2: Development of pTx optimization methods to incorporate these priors to generate images with improved diagnostic quality
	a) Generation of sequence specific signal models which include these relaxation rates
	b) Creation of optimization algorithms to calculate signal for diseased and healthy tissues using the tissue relaxation priors generated in a). 
		i) Signal models are not typically utilized for more complex sequences such as ASL, FLAIR, MPRAGE, or MP2RAGE sequences. We will seek to generate a library of signal models for these different sequences.
		ii) Since these signal models can be computationally expensive to solve exactly, we will develop signal approximation methods. An example of which was given in Haluptzok et. al. where they generated a discrete precomputed dictionary of signals and used on the fly interpolation of this dictionary in order to efficiently optimize pTx performance. We also believe that other methods could further improve computational efficiency to enable real time optimization, such as polynomial equation fitting, precomputing all interpolation B-splines on a discrete signal dictionary, or training a deep neural network to approximate the signals which can then be used in the optimization algorithm.
		iii) With these more complex signal and contrast loss functions, the loss landscape can be non-convex with multiple local minima, we will seek to develop tools to characterize this loss landscape with using method like those described in the paper by Haluptzok et. al. where they claimed L-curves generated from multiple starting points can be used as a qualitative tool to assess robustness to local minima.
	